The deltat processing tools (dttools) are used to process the data coming from the ENDURANCE mission to Lake Bonney, Antarctica (http://www.evl.uic.edu/endurance/)

NASA's Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets (ASTEP) Program is supporting ENDURANCE - the Environmentally Non-Disturbing Under-ice Robotic ANtarctic Explorer - to demonstrate concepts for exploring the ice-covered ocean on Jupiter's moon Europa. ENDURANCE is designed to swim untethered under ice, in order to create three-dimensional maps of the underwater environment, and to collect data and samples of microbial life.
ENDURANCE goals are to:
 * further biological re­search in the ter­res­trial en­vi­ron­ments analo­gous to those found on other planets, 
 * develop tech­nologies that enable remote searches for, and identification of, life in extreme environments 
 * perform a systems - level field campaign designed to demon­strate and vali­date the science and tech­nology in extreme environ­ments on Earth. (Astro­biology Science and Tech­nology for Ex­ploring the Planets) Program.

The sonar data gathered by the ENDURANCE AUV has been used to recontruct a 3d model of East Lake Bonney. A customized set of tools has been developed for this purpose. The tools are able to decimate and clean up the source sonar range, perform raytracing using water sound velocity profiles, and extract a surface from the filtered points using Poisson Surface Reconstruction. The resulting bathymetry has been rendered and animated inside Paraview.